Bank of England may bring early end to QE, says rate-setter
Ian McCafferty urges following the Fed’s example

The Bank of England should consider unwinding its £435 billion quantitative easing programme earlier than planned, one of its eight policymakers has suggested.

Ian McCafferty, one of three rate-setters who voted for an increase last month, said that the Bank ought to review its policy of leaving QE unchanged until interest rates are close to 2 per cent.

In an interview with The Times, he also said that he was minded to vote for a quarter-point rate rise again next month in a sign that the monetary policy committee will remain divided.

Yesterday Ben Broadbent, the Bank’s deputy governor, said he was “not ready” to tighten policy. Economists expect the MPC, which is one member short, to be split 5-3 in favour of holding policy.

Mr McCafferty’s call for a review of the Bank’s QE policy could have economic ramifications. A shift might affect longer-term borrowing costs set by the markets, which in turn could affect pension fund deficits, companies’ investment plans, bank profits and even fixed-rate mortgages.

The Bank’s QE guidance was set in May 2014, when it said “the MPC is likely to defer sales of assets at least until Bank Rate has reached a level from which it could be cut materially”.

Interest rates were 0.5 per cent at the time and senior policymakers explained that the guidance meant that the Bank would not start thinking about QE until rates were about 2 per cent. Rates have since been cut to 0.25 per cent, but the QE guidance remains in place.

Mr McCafferty’s thinking reflects moves at the US Federal Reserve, which plans to start selling its $4.5 trillion QE programme shortly. “Given that other central banks are thinking about it, I think it would be remiss of us not to at least think about it,” Mr McCafferty said. “I think it’s a question that needs a bit of asking.”

He said using that QE to tighten policy may even be desirable: “The slope of the yield curve is now abnormally flat. The unusual flatness then means you have slight distortions to discount rates [for pension funds], to the way in which firms think about investment, all sorts of things that maybe we need to consider.

“It may well be that we need to think, ‘Are there qualitative differences in terms of the impact on the slope of the yield curve’? ”

The Fed is expected to start running off QE as early as September, having raised rates four times. Should it do so, its actions would be at odds with the Bank’s present QE guidance. Mr McCafferty said that his comments were personal opinions and not policy.

On interest rates, Mr McCafferty said: “As of today, I would not be changing my position.” He decided to switch his vote for a rate rise in June because the economy was holding up and inflation could become problematic.

Mr McCafferty pointed to the strong jobs data, with unemployment at a 42-year low. “Companies don’t continue to hire if there is a significant slackening in demand,” he said. “That suggests there is some underlying resilience in the economy.”

Inflation, now at 2.9 per cent, was likely to “peak at over 3 per cent”, which could affect pay bargaining. Mr McCafferty said “consumer growth will slow” but not by more than expected and confidence was firm.

Weak business surveys reflected “election uncertainty” that was likely to dissipate. Business investment has held up better than the Bank’s measures of uncertainty suggested since last June’s referendum.

Mr McCafferty, calling himself a gradualist, said: “If you adjust monetary policy slowly, you have a better impact on the real economy,” A quarter-point rate rise “would only be a partial reduction of the stimulus” after the Brexit vote.